During evolution, plants have developed various functional principles for sealing and healing wounds. Prime examples are succulent leaves of Delosperma cooperi that seal external injuries within 60 min. Cross sections of intact leaves show a centripetal multilayer structure consisting of five tissues alternately under tensile and compressive prestress. Injuries destroy this mechanical equilibrium causing a deformation of the entire leaf until a new equilibrium is reached, and the wound edges meet, thereby sealing the fissure. Following this functional principle of D. cooperi leaves, a planar three-layer materials system consisting of a sheet of shape memory polymer (SMP) with programmed temporary geometry sandwiched between two polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheets is developed. After the individual sheets are bonded at room temperature, the application of heat treatment without mechanical constraints results in a prestressed multilayer system. The damage-triggered bending behavior of the three-layer system is described by means of an analytical model and feasibility tests establishing the self-sealing functionality of the system. Thus, a biomimetic materials system with a self-sealing function within the framework of a biomimetic biology push process is developed. However, the discussion herein has gone beyond the biological model, because the self-sealing three-layer materials system can additionally serve as an actuator.
One approach to realize more life-like soft robots is the use of pneumatically contracting structures, acting as muscles. Fabricating such systems usually requires manual assembly or molding steps, which extend the time between designing and testing of a new concept. In order to streamline rapid prototyping this study used a multi-material FDM 3D printer for producing a simplified robotic arm with an integrated pneumatic muscle. The actuator working as a pneumatic bicep is printed from thermoplastic polyurethane with a shore hardness of A70, while the arm itself is made of rigid polylactic acid. During the printing process the muscle is, while being printed itself, embedded into the arm by a physical joint, through which the arm assembly can change its angle according to the actuation. In this work, we describe the challenges appearing in such a combined processing of two different materials and how they are addressed. Through its design the resulting soft robotic arm is printed without the need of any support material inside its hollow structures and is ready for testing right after the printing finished. By applying negative pressure to the actuator’s inlet, the arm was able to lift up to 270 g load.
Fast snapping in the carnivorous Venus ﬂytrap (Dionaea muscipula) involves trap lobe bending and abrupt curvature inversion (snap-buckling), but how do these traps reopen? Here, the trap reopening mechanics in two diﬀerent D. muscipula clones, producing normal-sized (N traps, max. ≈3 cm in length) and large traps (L traps, max. ≈4.5 cm in length) are investigated. Time-lapse experiments reveal that both N and L traps can reopen by smooth and continuous outward lobe bending, but only L traps can undergo smooth bending followed by a much faster snap-through of the lobes. Additionally, L traps can reopen asynchronously, with one of the lobes moving before the other. This study challenges the current consensus on trap reopening, which describes it as a slow, smooth process driven by hydraulics and cell growth and/or expansion. Based on the results gained via three-dimensional digital image correlation (3D-DIC), morphological and mechanical investigations, the diﬀerences in trap reopening are proposed to stem from a combination of size and slenderness of individual traps. This study elucidates trap reopening processes in the (in)famous Dionaea snap traps – unique shape-shifting structures of great interest for plant biomechanics, functional morphology, and applications in biomimetics, i.e., soft robotics.
In nature and technology fluids are often transported directionally via pumping systems. Technical pumps often show signs of wear caused by abrasion of moving parts, erosion and fluid impurities, which can result in damage and excessive noise in the system. Pumping systems for electric cars (in e.g. cooling systems) should emit little noise as combustion engine noise, which normally ‘masks’ the noise caused by pumping systems, is missing. The biological peristaltic pumping principle was identified as having the highest biomimetic potential in terms of space requirements and transport capabilities (flow rate, pressure and transported media) for a transfer into silent and safe pumping systems. The peristaltic pumping of the esophagus directionally transports various media in a simple, silent and secure way and was therefore used as a biological role model for abstraction and technical implementation. For the present study, a biomimetic tubular pump was developed allowing for a simple, quiet and safe transport of a wide variety of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids with variable viscosity. The system is actuated by eight silicone-based pneumatic ring actuators with an elliptical inner conduit longitudinal diameter of 2 cm. The influence of actuation frequency and varying peristaltic actuation patterns on the flow rate achieved were investigated. The results indicate that the developed flexible and elastic silicone-based self-priming peristaltic pump achieves sufficient flow rates over 250 l/h and can serve as an alternative to conventional technical pumps in the field of electro-mobility.
This synopsis presents the state-of-the-art of peristaltic pump systems in biomimetics and living nature, and allows for a comparison by highlighting the differences in structure and function, as well as advantages and drawbacks for technical implementation. For the first time, data of selected biological examples are collected in one study to give a comprehensive overview of the performance of biological peristaltic pumps. The developed biomimetic pumping systems not only mimic the biological principle and by this inherit its advantages, but also show the usability of the principle in various pumping applications and medical research. A direct comparison of peristaltic pump systems in nature, biomimetics, and technology highlights their similarities, differences, and allows for proposing new fields of application.
Bioinspired and biomimetic soft machines rely on functions and working principles that have been abstracted from biology but that have evolved over 3.5 billion years. So far, few examples from the huge pool of natural models have been examined and transferred to technical applications. Like living organisms, subsequent generations of soft machines will autonomously respond, sense, and adapt to the environment. Plants as concept generators remain relatively unexplored in biomimetic approaches to robotics and related technologies, despite being able to grow, and continuously adapt in response to environmental stimuli. In this research review, we highlight recent developments in plant-inspired soft machine systems based on movement principles. We focus on inspirations taken from fast active movements in the carnivorous Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) and compare current developments in artificial Venus flytraps with their biological role model. The advantages and disadvantages of current systems are also analyzed and discussed, and a new state-of-the-art autonomous system is derived. Incorporation of the basic structural and functional principles of the Venus flytrap into novel autonomous applications in the field of robotics not only will inspire further plant-inspired biomimetic developments but might also advance contemporary plant-inspired robots, leading to fully autonomous systems utilizing bioinspired working concepts.
Due to their special peel tissue, comprising a dense ﬂavedo (exocarp), a less dense albedo (mesocarp), and a thin endocarp, most citrus fruits can withstand the drop from a tree or high shrub (relatively) undamaged. While most citrus fruit peels share this basic morphological setup, they differ in various structural and mechanical properties. This study analyzes how various properties in citrus peels of the pomelo, citron, lemon, grapefruit, and orange affect their compression behavior. We compare the structural and biomechanical properties (e.g., density, stress, Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio) of these peels and analyze which properties they share. Therefore, the peels were quasi-statically compressed to 50% compression and analyzed with manual and digital image correlation methods. Furthermore, local deformations were visualized, illustrating the inhomogeneous local strain patterns of the peels. The lateral strain of the peels was characterized by strain ratios and the Poisson’s ratio, which were close to zero or slightly negative for nearly all tested peels. Our findings prove that—despite significant differences in stress, magnitude, distribution, and thickness - the tested peels share a low Poisson’s ratio meaning that the general peel structures of citrus species offer a promising inspiration for the development of energy dissipating cellular structure that can be used for damage protection.
Soft robotic systems are ideally suited for adaptive bioinspired grippers due to their intrinsic properties. The advent of flexible 3D printing materials has made soft robotic actuator designs that were previously difficult or impossible to produce now implementable. In this study, we present an application-oriented comparison of the suitability for the printing of pneumatic actuators of two state-of-the-art 3D printing processes for flexible material, fused deposition modeling (FDM) and material jetting (PolyJet). While the FDM method affects the actuator designs, e.g., by the lack of practicable support material for flexible materials and its nozzle size, PolyJet uses support material but requires a design that allows the removal of it afterward. To compare how the two 3D printer technologies are suited for fabricating bending actuators, we have developed a pneumatic mono- material bending actuator that meets the design requirements to be printed with both printers. The design process itself and the characterization by bending angle and torque provided information about which design concepts could be better implemented with which method. The PolyJet process seems more suited for pneumatic actuators with large chambers and complex overhangs that show a sensitive response in the bending angle, but have low robustness. In contrast, the FDM method appears more suited for actuators with small chambers and complex geometries that feature high robustness and higher absolute tip force. These results form the basis for translating new inspirations from the elastic movements of living nature into our actuators by fully exploiting the advantages of each additive manufacturing process.
Since most plant movements take place through an interplay of elastic deformation and strengthening tissues, they are thus ideal concept generators for biomimetic hingeless actuators. In the framework of a biomimetic biology push process, we present the transfer of the functional movement principles of hollow tubular geometries that are surrounded by a net-like structure. Our plant models are the recent genera Ochroma (balsa) and Carica (papaya) as well as the fossil seed fern Lyginopteris oldhamia, which hold a net of macroscopic fiber structures enveloping the whole trunk. Asymmetries in these fiber nets, which are specifically caused by asymmetric growth of the secondary wood, enable the up-righting of inclined Ochroma and Carica stems. In a tubular net-like structure, the fiber angles play a crucial role in stress–strain relationships. When braided tubes are subjected to internal pressure, they become shorter and thicker if the fiber angle is greater than 54.7◦ . However, if the fiber angle is less than 54.7◦ , they become longer and thinner. In this article, we use straightforward functional demonstrators to show how insights into functional principles from living nature can be transferred into plant-inspired actuators with linear or asymmetric deformation.
Soft robotics aims at creating systems with improved performance of movement and adaptability in unknown, challenging, environments and with higher level of safety during interactions with humans. This Roadmap on Soft Robotics covers selected aspects for the design of soft robots significantly linked to the area of multifunctional materials, as these are considered a fundamental component in the design of soft robots for an improvement of their peculiar abilities, such as morphing, adaptivity and growth. The roadmap includes different approaches for components and systems design, bioinspired materials, methodologies for building soft robots, strategies for the implementation and control of their functionalities and behavior, and examples of soft-bodied systems showing abilities across different environments. For each covered topic, the author(s) describe the current status and research directions, current and future challenges, and perspective advances in science and technology to meet the challenges.
In an era of ever faster and more momentous technological development, both technology assessment and transdisciplinary interventions are in danger of structurally lagging behind the speed of innovation. This paper proposes a new tiered approach to technology assessment at low Technology Readiness Levels that enables a both rapid and concerted interdisciplinary science response to this Great Acceleration. Covering sustainability, ethics, and consumer issues, this approach encourages and enables the innovators themselves to conduct assessments embedded in the innovation process as early as possible. Suitable tools for early engagement that help facilitate development-integrated assessments are introduced and described. The design and use of these instruments in the field of basic research is illustrated using the Cluster of Excellence livMatS as an example.
Plant movements are of increasing interest for biomimetic approaches where hinge-free compliant mechanisms (flexible structures) for applications e.g. in architecture, soft robotics, and medicine are developed. In this article, we first concisely summarize the knowledge on plant movement principles and show how the different modes of actuation, i.e. the driving forces of motion, can be used in biomimetic approaches for the development motile technical systems. We then emphasize on current developments and breakthroughs in the field, i.e. the technical implementation of plant movement principles through additive manufacturing, the development of structures capable of tracking movements (tropisms), and the development of structures that can perform multiple movement steps. Regarding the additive manufacturing section, we present original results on the successful transfer of several plant movement principles into 3D printed hygroscopic shape-changing structures (“4D printing”). The resulting systems include edge growth-driven actuation (as known from the petals of the lily flower), bending scale-like structures with functional bilayer setups (inspired from pinecones), modular aperture architectures (as can be similarly seen in moss peristomes), snap-through elastic instability actuation (as known from Venus flytrap snap-traps), and origami-like curved-folding kinematic amplification (inspired by the carnivorous waterwheel plant). Our novel biomimetic compliant mechanisms highlight the feasibility of modern printing techniques for designing and developing versatile tailored motion responses for technical applications. We then focus on persisting challenges in the field, i.e. how to speed- boost intrinsically slow hydraulically actuated structures and how to achieve functional resilience and robustness, before we propose the establishment of a motion design catalogue in the conclusion.
The abstraction and implementation of plant movement principles into biomimetic compliant systems are of increasing interest for technical applications, e.g., in architecture, medicine, and soft robotics. Within the respective research and development approaches, advanced methods such as 4D printing or 3D-braiding pultrusion are typically used to generate proof-of-concept demonstrators at the laboratory or demonstrator scale. However, such techniques are generally time-consuming, complicated, and cost-intensive, which often impede the rapid realization of a sufficient number of demonstrators for testing or teaching. Therefore, we have produced comparable simple handcrafted compliant systems based on paper, wood, plastic foil, and/or glue as construction materials. A variety of complex plant movement principles have been transferred into these low-cost physical demonstrators, which are self-actuated by shrinking processes induced by the anisotropic hygroscopic properties of wood or paper. The developed systems have a high potential for fast, precise, and low-cost abstraction and transfer processes in biomimetic approaches and for the “hands-on understanding” of plant movements in applied university and school courses.
Polymeric shape-memory elastomers can recover to a permeant shape from any programmed deformation under external stimuli. They are mostly cross-linked polymeric materials and can be shaped by three-dimensional (3D) printing. However, 3D printed shape-memory polymers so far only exhibit elasticity above their transition temperature, which results in their programmed shape being inelastic or brittle at lower temperatures. To date, 3D printed shapememory elastomers with elasticity both below and above their transition temperature remain an elusive goal, which limits the application of shape-memory materials as elastic materials at low temperatures. In this paper, we printed, for the first time, a customdeveloped shape-memory elastomer based on polyethylene glycol using digital light processing, which possesses elasticity and stretchability in a wide temperature range, below and above the transition temperature. Young’s modulus in these two states can vary significantly, with a difference of up to 2 orders of magnitude. This marked difference in Young’s modulus imparts excellent shape-memory properties to the material. The difference in Young’s modulus at different temperatures allows for the programming of the pneumatic actuators by heating and softening specific areas. Consequently, a single actuator can exhibit distinct movement modes based on the programming process it undergoes.
A current trend observed in the Anthropocene is the search for bioinspired solutions. Since it became possible to change the quality of the boundary between living and technical systems, more and more life-like technical products have been developed in recent years. Using five plant-inspired developments of motile technical systems for architecture and softrobotics, we show how the boundary between living and technical systems undulates, shifts, perforates, blurs, or dissolves with increasing life-likeness. We discuss what causes theses changes in the boundary and how this contributes to the overall aim to achieve higher resilience, robustness, and improved esthetics of plant-inspired products. Inspiration from living systems that make efficient and economic use of materials and energy and are fully recyclable after “service time” may additionally contribute to sustainable material use, one of the major challenges in the Anthropocene.
Biomimetics is an interdisciplinary field of science that deals with the analysis and systematic transfer of biological insights into technical applications. Moreover, the development of biomimetic products helps to improve our understanding of biological concept generators (reverse biomimetics). What does this mean for the education of kindergarten children, pupils, students, teachers, and others interested in biomimetics? The challenge of biomimetics is to have a solid knowledge base in the scientific disciplines involved and the competency to be open-minded enough to develop innovative solutions. This apparently contradictory combination ensures the transfer of knowledge from biology to engineering and vice versa on the basis of a common language that is perfectly understandable to everyone, e.g., the language of models, algorithms, and complete mathematical formulations. The opportunity within biomimetics is its ability to arouse student interest in technology via the fascination inherent in biological solutions and to awaken enthusiasm for living nature via the understanding of technology. Collaboration in working groups promotes professional, social, and personal skills. The variety of biomimetics is mirrored by the large number of educational modules developed with respect to existing biomimetic products and methods.
The first botanical gardens in Europe were established for the study of medicinal, poisonous, and herbal plants by students of medicine or pharmacy at universities. As the natural sciences became increasingly important in the 19th Century, botanical gardens additionally took on the role of public educational institutions. Since then, learning from living nature with the aim of developing technical applications, namely biomimetics, has played a special role in botanical gardens. Sir Joseph Paxton designed rainwater drainage channels in the roof of the Crystal Palace for the London World’s Fair in 1881, having been inspired by the South American giant water lily (Victoria amazonica). The development of the Lotus-Effect® at the Botanical Garden Bonn was inspired by the self-cleaning leaf surfaces of the sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera). At the Botanic Garden Freiburg, a self-sealing foam coating for pneumatic systems was developed based on the self-sealing of the liana stems of the genus Aristolochia. Currently, botanical gardens are both research institutions and places of lifelong learning. Numerous botanical gardens provide biomimetics trails with information panels at each station for self-study and guided biomimetics tours with simple experiments to demonstrate the functional principles transferred from the biological model to the technical application. We present eight information panels suitable for setting up education about biomimetics and simple experiments to support guided garden tours about biomimetics.
Because plants are considered immobile, they remain underrepresented as concept generators for soft robots and soft machines. However, plants show a great variety of movements exclusively based on elastic deformation of regions within their moving organs. The absence of gliding parts, as found in the joints of vertebrates and insects, prevents stress concentration and attrition. Since plants have no central control unit (brain), stimulus-sensing, decision-making and reaction usually take place noncentrally in the hierarchically structured materials systems of the moving organs, in what can be regarded as an example of physical intelligence. These characteristics make plants interesting models for a new group of soft robots and soft machines that differ fundamentally from those inspired by animals. The potential of such plantinspired soft robots and machines is shown in six examples and is illustrated by examples applied in architecture and medicine.
Through their anisotropic cellular mesostructure and differential swelling and shrinking properties, hygroscopic plant structures move in response to changes in the environment without consuming metabolic energy. When the movement is choreographed in sequential time steps, either in individual structures or with a coordinated interplay of various structural elements, complex functionalities such as dispersal and protection of seeds are achieved. Inspired by the multi-phase motion in plant structures, this paper presents a method to physically program the timescale and the sequences of shape-change in 4D-printed hygromorphic structures. Using the FDM 3D-printing method, we have developed multi-layered, multi-material functional bilayers that combine highly hygroscopic active layers (printed with hygroscopic bio-composite materials) with hydrophobic restrictive and blocking layers (printed with PLA and TPC materials). The timescale of motion is programmed through the design of the mesostructured layers and 3D-printing process parameters, including thickness (number of printed active layers), porosity (filling ratio of the active layer), and water permeability (filling ratio of the blocking layer). Through a series of experiments, it is shown that the timescale of motion can be extended by increasing the thickness of the active layer, decreasing the porosity of the active layer, or increasing the filling ratio of the hydrophobic restrictive and blocking layers. Similarly, a lower thickness of the active layer and lower filling ratio of all layers result in a faster motion. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate several prototypes that exhibit sequential motion, including an aperture with overlapping elements where each completes its movement sequentially to avoid collision, and a self-locking mechanism where defined areas of the structure are choreographed to achieve a multi-step self-shaping and locking function. The presented method extends the programmability and the functional capabilities of hygromorphic 4D-printing, allowing for novel applications across fields such as robotics, smart actuators, and adaptive architecture.
Nature’s “inventions” have inspired designers, researchers and engineers for centuries. Over the past 25 years, progressive improvements in analytical and manufacturing technologies allowed us to understand more and more biological principles and to apply them to engineered systems. In recent years, this has led to the advancement and use of metamaterials in bioinspired systems. These material systems, mostly based on unit cells, allow engineering systems to be equipped with ever-new nature-like capabilities. In this study, we use novel bending elements to create doubly curved surfaces that can snap from concave to convex like the lobes of a Venus flytrap. By connecting two of these surfaces using a central actuator unit cell, an artificial Venus flytrap based on unit cells can be created for the first time. In this study, the closing behavior and the force required for the movement are characterized. Based on these results, a suitable environmentally activated actuator will be selected to generate an autonomous and adaptive artificial Venus flytrap system that can be used as a gripper for autonomous systems in the future.
The field of plant-inspired robotics is based on principles underlying the movements and attachment and adaptability strategies of plants, which together with their materials systems serve as concept generators. The transference of the functions and underlying structural principles of plants thus enables the development of novel life-like technical materials systems. For example, principles involved in the hinge-less movements of carnivorous snap-trap plants and climbing plants can be used in technical applications. A combination of the snap-trap motion of two plant species (Aldrovanda vesiculosa and Dionaea muscipula) has led to the creation of a novel motion sequence for plant-inspired robotics in an artificial Venus flytrap system, the Venus Flyflap. The novel motion pattern of Venus Flyflap lobes has been characterized by using four state-of-the-art actuation systems. A kinematic analysis of the individual phases of the new motion cycle has been performed by utilizing precise pneumatic actuation. Contactless magnetic actuation augments lobe motion into energyefficient resonance-like oscillatory motion. The use of environmentally driven actuator materials has allowed autonomous motion generation via changes in environmental conditions. Measurement of the energy required for the differently actuated movements has shown that the Venus Flyflap is not only faster than the biological models in its closing movement, but also requires less energy in certain cases for the execution of this movement.
During the recent decade, we have witnessed an extraordinary ﬂourishing of soft robotics. Rekindled interest in soft robots is partially associated with the advances in manufacturing techniques that enable the fabrication of sophisticated multimaterial robotic bodies with dimensions ranging across multiple length scales. In recent manuscripts, a reader might find peculiar-looking soft robots capable of grasping, walking, or swimming. However, the growth in publication numbers does not always reﬂect the real progress in the field since many manuscripts employ very similar ideas and just tweak soft body geometries. Therefore, we unreservedly agree with the sentiment that future research must move beyond “soft for soft’s sake.” Soft robotics is an undoubtedly fascinating field, but it requires a critical assessment of the limitations and challenges, enabling us to spotlight the areas and directions where soft robots will have the best leverage over their traditional counterparts. In this perspective paper, we discuss the current state of robotic research related to such important aspects as energy autonomy, electronic-free logic, and sustainability. The goal is to critically look at perspectives of soft robotics from two opposite points of view provided by early career researchers and highlight the most promising future direction, that is, in our opinion, the employment of soft robotic technologies for soft bioinspired artificial organs.
Plant motion patterns and structures have inspired designers, researchers and engineers for centuries. Recent advancements in analyzing and manufacturing technologies have allowed for a deeper understanding of biological principles and their application to bioinspired engineered systems. This has advanced 3D printing of thermoresponsive materials, like shape memory polymers. These materials enable the translation and creation of complex bioinspired mobile structures. In this study, we use novel 3D printable shape memory polymers in a multi-material, multilayer system to create double curved surfaces that can change their curvature from concave to convex, like the lobes of a Venus flytrap. The artificial trap lobes can be manufactured by identifying suitable material combinations, bonding methods and programming parameters. In this study, the system parameters to achieve a motion and the closing behavior in response to a temperature change are characterized. The resulting trap lobe represents a successful translation of the prestress ratios and layered morphology found in the biological model into an autonomous artificial Venus flytrap.